Booker believes we tell stories as a mechanism of
passing a model for life from generation to generation; that in
essence, all stories are archetypal family dramas, and that their core
message is that we must resist selfish evil (Booker doesn’t use this
term, preferring ‘ego-centred’, according to his Jungian framework).
-------------------------------------------
The Basic Meta-plot
-------------------------------------------

Most of the meta-plots are variations on the following pattern:

1. Anticipation Stage

The call to adventure, and the promise of what is to come.

2. Dream Stage

The heroine or hero experiences some initial success - everything
seems to be going well, sometimes with a dreamlike sense of
invincibility.

3. Frustration Stage

First confrontation with the real enemy. Things begin to go wrong.

4. Nightmare Stage

At the point of maximum dramatic tension, disaster has erupted and it
seems all hope is lost.

5. Resolution

The hero or heroine is eventually victorious, and may also be united
or reunited with their ‘other half’ (a romantic partner).

There are some parallels with Campbell’s Heroic Monomyth, but his
pattern is more applicable to mythology than to stories in general.

-------------------------------------------
Overcoming the Monster (and the Thrilling Escape from Death)
-------------------------------------------

Examples: Perseus, Theseus, Beowulf, Dracula, War of the Worlds,
Nicholas Nickleby, The Guns of Navarone, Seven Samurai/The Magnificent
Seven, James Bond, Star Wars: A New Hope.

Meta-plot structure:

1. Anticipation Stage (The Call)

2. Dream Stage (Initial Success)

3. Frustration Stage (Confrontation)

4. Nightmare Stage (Final Ordeal)

5. Miraculous Escape (Death of the Monster)

-------------------------------------------
Rags to Riches
-------------------------------------------

Examples: Cinderella, Aladdin, Jane Eyre, Great Expectations, David
Copperfield
Dark Version: Le Rouge et Le Noir (1831), What Makes Sammy Run? (1940)

Meta-plot structure:

1. Initial Wretchedness at Home (The Call)

2. Out into the World (Initial Success)

3. The Central Crisis

4. Independence (Final Ordeal)

5. Final Union, Completion and Fulfilment

-------------------------------------------
The Quest
-------------------------------------------

Examples: The Odyssey, Pilgrim’s Progress, King Solomon’s Mines,
Watership Down

Meta-plot structure:

1. The Call (Oppressed in the City of Destruction)

2. The Journey (Ordeals of the Hero/Heroine & Companions)
May include some or all of the following:

a. Monsters
b. Temptations
c. The Deadly Opposites
d. The Journey to the Underworld

3. Arrival and Frustration

4. The Final Ordeals

5. The Goal (Kingdom, Other Half or Elixir won)

-------------------------------------------
Voyage & Return
-------------------------------------------

Examples: Alice in Wonderland, Goldilocks and the Three Bears,
Orpheus, The Time Machine, Peter Rabbit, Brideshead Revisited, The
Rime of the Ancient Mariner, Gone with the Wind, The Third Man (1948)

Meta-plot structure:

1. Anticipation Stage (‘Fall’ into the Other World)

2. Initial Fascination (Dream Stage)

3. Frustration Stage

4. Nightmare Stage

5. Thrilling Escape and Return

-------------------------------------------
Comedy
-------------------------------------------

Comedy is dealt with by a less rigid structure. In essence, the comedy
meta-plot is about building an absurdly complex set of problems which
then miraculously resolve at the climax. There is much discussion of
how the comedy plot has developed over time:

 Stage one: Aristophanes

 Stage two: ‘The New Comedy’ (comedy becomes a love story)

 Stage three: Shakespeare (plot fully developed)

 Comedy as real life: Jane Austen

 The plot disguised: Middlemarch, War and Peace

 The plot burlesqued: Gilbert & Sullivan, Oscar Wilde

Meta-plot structure:

1. Under the Shadow

A little world in which people are under the shadow of confusion,
uncertainty and frustration and are shut up from one another.

2. Tightening the Knot

The confusion gets worse until the pressure of darkness is at its most
acute and everyone is in a nightmarish tangle.

3. Resolution

With the coming to light of things not previously recognised,
perceptions are dramatically changed. Shadows are dispelled, the
situation is miraculously transformed and the little world is brought
together in a state of joyful union.

-------------------------------------------
Tragedy
-------------------------------------------

Examples: Macbeth, The Picture of Dorian Gray, Carmen, Bonnie & Clyde,
Jules et Jim, Anna Karenina, Madame Bovary, Julius Caesar

Meta-plot structure:

1. Anticipation Stage (Greed or Selfishness)

2. Dream Stage

3. Frustration Stage

4. Nightmare Stage

5. Destruction or Death Wish Stage

-------------------------------------------
Rebirth
-------------------------------------------

Examples: Sleeping Beauty, The Frog Prince, Beauty and the Beast, The
Snow Queen, A Christmas Carol, The Secret Garden, Peer Gynt

Meta-plot structure:

1. Under the Shadow

A young hero or heroine falls under the shadow of a dark power

2. The Threat Recedes

Everything seems to go well for a while - the threat appears to have
receded.

3. The Threat Returns

Eventually the threat approaches again in full force, until the hero
or heroine is seen imprisoned in a state of living death.

4. The Dark Power Triumphant

The state of living death continues for a long time when it seems the
dark power has completely triumphed.

5. Miraculous Redemption

If the imprisoned person is a heroine, redeemed by the hero; if a
hero, by a young woman or child.

Dark Versions

All of the above plots have dark versions, in which the ‘complete
happy ending’ is never achieved because of some problem. The only
exception is Tragedy, which is already the ‘dark’ version.

New Plots

Two additional plots are presented which are outside of the basic
seven listed above. Note that the existence of general patterns of
plot is not intended to mean that no other plots are possible.

Rebellion Against ‘The One’

A solitary hero/heroine finds themselves being drawn into a state of
resentful, mystified opposition to some immense power, which exercises
total sway over the world of the hero. Initially they feel they are
right and the mysterious power is at fault, but suddenly the hero/
heroine is confronted by the power in its awesome omnipotence. The
rebellious hero/heroine is crushed and forced to recognise that their
view had been based only on a very limited subjective perception of
reality. They accept the power’s rightful claim to rule.

Example: The Book of Job
Dark version: Brave New World, Nineteen Eighty-Four

-------------------------------------------
The Mystery
-------------------------------------------

Begins by posing a riddle, usually through the revelation that some
baffling crime has been committed. Central figure unravels the riddle.

Examples: Bel and the Dragon, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Agatha Christie

----------------------------------------------

Archetypes

In addition to patterns of plots, there is a pattern of characters
provided according to Jungian principles. These archetypal characters
are as follows:

Negative (centred on Jungian Ego i.e. "evil"):

 Dark Father, Tyrant or Dark Magician
 Dark Mother, Dark Queen or Hag
 Dark Rival or Dark Alter-Ego
 Dark Other Half or Temptress

Positive (centred on Jungian Self i.e. "good"):

 Light Father, Good King or Wise Old Man
 Light Mother, Good Queen or Wise Old Woman
 Light Alter-Ego or Friend and Companion
 Light Other Half (light anima/animus)

Note: Booker uses ‘witch’ where I use ‘hag’, for reasons that will be
apparent to most readers.

Three other archetypes are referenced:

 The Child
 The Animal Helper
 The Trickster

Additional Concepts

The Complete Happy Ending

In the regular versions of the meta-plots, if all that is ego-centred
becomes centred instead on the Self (i.e. if all characters are
redeemed), the result is a 'complete happy ending'. In the dark
versions of the story, the ending is generally tragic and disasterous
- both are considered to be following the same meta-plot. It is also
possible for stories to contain elements of both approaches.

The Unrealised Value

The chief dark figure signals to us the shadowy, negative version of
precisely what the hero or heroine will eventually have to make fully
positive in themselves if they are to emerge victorious and attain
'the complete happy ending'. Therefore, the villain metaphorically
represents what the hero or heroine will conquor both within
themselves, and in the world of the story.

Above and Below the Line

In general, (and especially in comedy) there is a dividing line in
effect. Above the line is the established social order, and below the
line are the servants,  ‘inferior’ or shadow elements. The problem
originates ‘above the line’ (e.g. with tyranny) but the road to
liberation always lies ‘below the line’ in the ‘inferior’ level.

Below the line can also be represented as a ‘shadow realm’, containing
the potential for wholeness. In the conclusion of the story, elements
may ‘emerge from the shadows’ to provide resolution.

The Seven Basic Plots is published by Continuum, ISBN-0-8264-5209-4.
http://onlyagame.typepad.com/only_a_game/2005/10/the_seven_basic.html
http://www.amazon.com/Seven-Basic-Plots-Tell-Stories/dp/0826480373